>> Ifill: THE FIRST PATIENT
DIAGNOSED WITH EBOLA IN THE U.S.
DIES.
WE TAKE YOU INSIDE THE C.D.C.'s
WAR ROOM AND THE FIGHT TO
CONTAIN THE VIRUS AT HOME AND
ABROAD.
>> I WORRY ABOUT IRRATIONAL
FEARS OF EBOLA.
IF YOU'RE A HEALTHCARE WORKER
TAKING CARE OF A PATIENT WITH
EBOLA, YOU BETTER BE SCARED AND
USE THAT FEAR TO MAKE SURE THAT
YOU DO ABSOLUTELY EVERYTHING
RIGHT WHEN YOU'RE CARING FOR
THAT PATIENT.
>> Ifill: GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN
IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
ALSO AHEAD THIS WEDNESDAY,
PRESIDENT OBAMA AND MILITARY
LEADERS WEIGH WHAT MORE CAN BE
DONE TO COMBAT ISLAMIC STATE
MILITANTS MARCHING TOWARD
TURKEY.
>> Ifill: A NEW BOOK EXPLORES
WHAT MAKES A GREAT COMMANDER IN
CHIEF AND WHY AMERICANS MIGHT
NOT WANT ANOTHER ABE LINCOLN.
>> WE WANT TO TURN THE PRESIDENT
INTO A COMBINATION OF HARRISON
FORD AND AIR FORCE ONE AND
SUPERMAN.
AND THE REALTY IS WE DON'T HAVE
A PRESIDENT LIKE THAT ANYMORE.
>> Woodruff: PLUS, CHINA'S MOST
FAMOUS ARTIST, AEI WEIWEI,
BARRED FROM LEAVING THE COUNTRY,
EXPLORES WHAT IT MEANS TO BE
FREE WITH AN EXHIBITION INSIDE
AMERICA'S MOST NOTORIOUS PRISON:
ALCATRAZ.
>> WE BASICALLY CANNOT TOUCH THE
WALLS.
WE CANNOT TOUCH ANYTHING.
WE CANNOT ADD ANYTHING.
THE HANGING INSTALLATION, THE
PRISONERS THEMSELVES, IT WAS
ONLY THERE FOR A PERIOD OF TIME.
>> Ifill: THOSE ARE SOME OF THE
STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: THE LIBERIAN MAN
WHO WAS DIAGNOSED IN DALLAS WITH
EBOLA, DIED TODAY.
THOMAS ERIC DUNCAN SHOWED NO
SYMPTOMS WHEN HE ARRIVED IN
TEXAS LAST MONTH, BUT HE BECAME
THE FIRST CONFIRMED CASE INSIDE
THE U.S. OFFICIALS SAID HIS BODY
WILL BE CREMATED.
HOURS LATER, THE HEAD OF THE
C.D.C. ANNOUNCED NEW SCREENING,
INCLUDING FEVER CHECKS FOR
TRAVELERS FROM LIBERIA, SIERRA
LEONE AND GUINEA.
>> IF ANY TRAVELERS ARE FOUND
EITHER TO HAVE A FEVER OR HAVE A
HISTORY OF CONTACT WITH EBOLA,
THEN THE ON-SITE CENTERS FOR
DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION
PUBLIC HEALTH OFFICER WILL
FURTHER INTERVIEW THAT
INDIVIDUAL, ASSESS THE
INDIVIDUAL, AND TAKE ADDITIONAL
ACTION AS APPROPRIATE.
>> Woodruff: THE MEASURES TAKE
EFFECT SATURDAY AT J.F.K.
INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT IN NEW
YORK, AND NEXT WEEK AT
INTERNATIONAL AIRPORTS IN
NEWARK, NEW JERSEY, WASHINGTON,
CHICAGO AND ATLANTA.
>> Ifill: THE WORLDWIDE TOLL IN
THE EBOLA OUTBREAK HAS RISEN
AGAIN.
THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
PUT THE CASUALTY COUNT TODAY AT
NEARLY 3,900.
THAT'S OUT OF 8,000 CONFIRMED
CASES.
AND IN SPAIN, THERE WAS NEW
UNREST LINKED TO THE INFECTION
OF A NURSE.
NEIL CONNERY OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS IS THERE, AND
FILED THIS REPORT.
>> Reporter: ANGER ON MADRID
STREETS.
THE AUTHORITIES' HANDLING OF
THIS EBOLA CRISIS UNDER ATTACK.
THESE PROTESTERS DRAGGED BY
POLICE FROM THE BLOCK WHERE THE
INFECTED NURSE AND HER HUSBAND
LIVED.
THEY WERE TRYING TO STOP THE
COUPLES' DOG FROM BEING PUT DOWN
BY OFFICIALS, BUT AS THE WORLD
BEYOND LOOKS ON, IT'S THE BIGGER
PICTURE HERE THAT'S GETTING
SERIOUS CONCERN.
THE NURSE, THERESA RAMERO RAMOS,
SEEN HERE WITH THE DOG, SAYS SHE
MAY HAVE BEEN INFECTED BY
TOUCHING HER FACE WITH A GLOVE
AS SHE CHANGED HER PROTECTIVE
CLOTHING.
ANNA GOMERTH, A FRIEND OF THE
NURSE, TOLD ME SHE'S NO FAITH IN
THE GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSE.
THE PEOPLE ARE AFRAID AND ANGRY
BECAUSE THEY DON'T KNOW ANYTHING
ABOUT THIS ILLNESS OR WHAT'S
HAPPENING HERE.
ACCORDING TO HER UNION, THE
NURSE START HELP THREE TIMES
OVER A WEEK BEFORE SHE WAS
TESTED FOR EBOLA.
LAST TUESDAY, SHE REPORTED A
FEVER, BUT WAS TOLD TO TAKE
PARACETEMOL.
SHE RANG THE HOSPITAL AGAIN ON
THURSDAY, BUT NO ACTION WAS
TAKEN.
WHEN SHE RANG AGAIN ON MONDAY,
SHE WAS TOLD TO GO TO A LOCAL
HOSPITAL, WHERE SHE WAS KEPT ON
A PUBLIC WARD BEHIND ONLY A
FABRIC SCREEN AND SOME TAPE.
ONLY WHEN HER EBOLA TEST CAME
BACK POSITIVE WAS SHE FINALLY
TRANSPORTED TO THE CARLOS THE
THIRD.
THERE'S A DEEP SENSE OF MISTRUST
HERE AT HOW THE AUTHORITIES ARE
HANDLING THIS CRISIS.
ASIDE FROM THE MEDICAL EFFORTS
TO CONTAIN THIS OUTBREAK,
REGAINING THE PUBLIC'S FAITH IN
THE COMING HOURS AND DAYS IS
GOING TO PROVE CRUCIAL.
TODAY, THE SPANISH PRIME
MINISTER BOASTED THE COUNTRY'S
HEALTH SYSTEM IS ONE OF THE BEST
IN THE WORLD.
BACK IN THE SUBURBAN BLOCK,
WHERE THE INFECTED NURSE AND HER
HUSBAND LIVED, THE RESIDENTS MAY
BEG TO DIFFER.
>> Ifill: WE'LL GET A CLOSER
LOOK AT WHAT THE U.S. CENTERS
FOR DISEASE CONTROL IS DOING TO
FIGHT THE OUTBREAK, HERE AND
ABROAD, AFTER THE NEWS SUMMARY.
>> Woodruff: ISLAMIC STATE
FORCES MADE A NEW PUSH ON THE
SYRIAN TOWN OF KOBANI THIS
EVENING DESPITE COALITION AIR
STRIKES.
KURDISH DEFENDERS TOLD OF FIERCE
NEW FIGHTING IN THE TOWN NEAR
THE TURKISH BORDER.
EARLIER, THE KURDS SAID THE AIR
ATTACKS HAD SLOWED THE MILITANTS
ADVANCE.
BUT THEY ALSO WARNED THE
U.S.-LED CAMPAIGN NEEDS TO BE
EVEN STRONGER.
MEANWHILE, PRESIDENT OBAMA MET
WITH U.S. COMMANDERS AT THE
PENTAGON TO DISCUSS OVERALL
STRATEGY IN SYRIA AND IRAQ.
>> OUR STRUGGLES CONTINUES
ALONGSIDE OUR PARTNERS.
IT REMAINS A DIFFICULT MISSION.
AS I INDICATED FROM THE START,
THIS IS NOT SOMETHING GOING TO
BE SOLVED
>> Woodruff: THE BATTLE FOR
KOBANI ALSO TRIGGERED MORE
VIOLENCE IN TURKEY, WHERE KURDS
ARE DEMANDING ACTION TO HELP
THEIR BRETHREN IN SYRIA.
POLICE USED WATER CANNON AND
FIRED TEAR GAS AT DEMONSTRATORS
IN THE LATEST CLASHES.
OFFICIALS SAID AT LEAST 19
PEOPLE HAVE DIED IN TWO DAYS OF
RIOTING.
>> Woodruff: LAWYERS FOR KENYA'S
PRESIDENT HAVE ASKED THE
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT TO
TOSS OUT CHARGES OF CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY AGAINST HIM.
UHURU KENYATTA IS ACCUSED OF
SPARKING POST-ELECTION VIOLENCE
IN 2007 THAT TOOK MORE THAN
1,000 LIVES.
THE DEFENSE ARGUED TODAY THE
CASE HAS COLLAPSED.
PROSECUTORS SAID KENYATTA'S
GOVERNMENT HAS OBSTRUCTED THE
INVESTIGATION.
>> Ifill: TWO AMERICANS AND A
GERMAN WON THIS YEAR'S NOBEL
PRIZE IN CHEMISTRY TODAY FOR
MAKING MICROSCOPES MORE POWERFUL
THAN ANYONE THOUGHT POSSIBLE.
U.S. RESEARCHERS ERIC BETZIG AND
WILLIAM MOERNER AND GERMAN
STEFAN HELL USED FLUORESCENT
MOLECULES TO SEE DEEP INSIDE THE
INNER WORKINGS OF LIVING CELLS.
THEIR ACHIEVEMENTS HAVE GREATLY
ENHANCED RESEARCH INTO
PARKINSON'S AND ALZHEIMER'S.
>> Woodruff: TELECOM GIANT AT&T
WILL PAY $105 MILLION TO SETTLE
ALLEGATIONS IT PUT BOGUS CHARGES
ON CUSTOMERS' BILLS.
THE PRACTICE IS KNOWN AS
CRAMMING AND IT'S BEEN AN ISSUE
FOR YEARS, AS USERS COMPLAINED
THEY WERE CHARGED FOR SERVICES
THEY NEVER REQUESTED LIKE DAILY
HOROSCOPES.
TOM WHEELER CHAIRS THE FEDERAL
COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION.
>> IT'S ESTIMATED THAT
20 MILLION CONSUMERS A YEAR ARE
CAUGHT IN THIS KIND OF TRAP.
COSTING HUNDREDS OF MILLIONS OF
DOLLARS.
IT STOPS TODAY FOR AT&T.
>> Woodruff: THE SETTLEMENT
INCLUDES $80 MILLION FOR
CUSTOMER REFUNDS.
>> Ifill: MINNESOTA VIKINGS STAR
ADRIAN PETERSON APPEARED IN
COURT TODAY IN TEXAS, ON CHARGES
BRANCH TO PUNISH HIS YOUNG SON.
PETERSON WAS SURROUNDED BY
REPORTERS AND CAMERAS AS HE
ARRIVED AT A COURTHOUSE IN
CONROE, TEXAS.
TRIAL WAS TENTATIVELY SET TO
BEGIN DECEMBER FIRST.
THE RUNNING BACK HAS BEEN
SUSPENDED UNTIL THE CASE IS
RESOLVED.
>> Woodruff: THE SUPREME COURT
NOW HAS TO DECIDE WHETHER
WORKERS SHOULD BE PAID FOR TIME
SPENT IN SECURITY SCREENINGS
AFTER SHIFTS END.
THE SCREENINGS AIM TO PREVENT
THEFT, BUT TWO FORMER WORKERS AT
ONLINE RETAILER AMAZON CLAIMED
THEY WERE KEPT WAITING UP TO 25
MINUTES EVERY DAY.
BUSINESS GROUPS SAY EMPLOYERS
COULD FACE BILLIONS IN
RETROACTIVE PAY, IF THE WORKERS
WIN.
>> Ifill: WALL STREET, ROARED
BACK AFTER THE FEDERAL RESERVE
SHOWED IT'S IN NO HURRY TO RAISE
INTEREST RATES.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 274 POINTS, RECOUPING ALL
OF YESTERDAY'S LOSSES AND
CLOSING AT 16,994; THE NASDAQ
ROSE 83 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
4,468; THE S&P 500 ADDED 33, TO
FINISH NEAR 1,969.
>> Woodruff: STILL TO COME ON
THE NEWSHOUR.
INSIDE THE FIGHT TO STOP EBOLA.
CAN AIR POWER ALONE STOP ISLAMIC
STATE MILITANTS ADVANCES IN
SYRIA AND IRAQ?
THE CHANGING LEGAL LANDSCAPE FOR
SAME-SEX MARRIAGE IN THE U.S.
WHY AMERICAN CULTURE PREVENTS
MODERN-DAY PRESIDENTS FROM BEING
GREAT.
A NEW PUSH TO FIND THE MISSING
MALAYSIAN JETLINER.
AND, A DISSIDENT ARTIST EXPLORES
THE DEFINITION OF FREEDOM INSIDE
THE WALLS OF A PRISON.
>> Ifill: THIS WAS A SOBERING
DAY IN THE BATTLE AGAINST THE
EBOLA OUTBREAK.
AS THE DEATH TOLL CLIMBED, THE
FIRST PATIENT DIAGNOSED IN THE
U.S. DIED AND PLANS FOR
SCREENING RAMPED UP AT MAJOR
AMERICAN AIRPORTS.
THE C.D.C. IS AT THE CENTER OF
THE GOVERNMENT'S RESPONSE, BOTH
HERE AND ABROAD.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT KATHLEEN
McCLEERY GOT AN INSIDE LOOK AT
HOW THE AGENCY IS TACKLING THE
JOB.
>> Reporter: THE EMERGENCY
OPERATIONS CENTER AT C.D.C.
HEADQUARTERS IN ATLANTA NEVER
SLEEPS.
A QUIET HOME BELIES THE FRIENDLY
ACTIVITY HERE.
>> IT'S UNDER 2014 EBOLA
INTERNATIONAL.
>> Reporter: THIS IS THE NERVE
CENTER FOR THE EFFORT TO CONTIN
AND CONTROL THE EBOLA VIRUS.
C.D.C. DIRECTOR, INTEREST THOMAS
FRIEDEN.
>> WE WORK TO PROTECT AMERICANS
AND WE DO THAT WITH BOOTS ON THE
GROUND IN EVERY STATE IN 50
COUNTRIES AROUND THE WORLD, WE
DO THAT BY THE TOP QUALITY
SCIENCE AND SCIENTISTS AND WE DO
THAT BY ACTION.
>> WE ARE THE WATCH TEAM HERE AT
THE C.D.C.
WE ARE BASICALLY LIKE THE
C.D.C.'S NIN 911.
>> Reporter: GORDON MAY
OVERSEES THE WATCH STATION WHICH
GETS CALLS FROM THE PUBLIC,
MEDIA AND HEALTH OFFICIALS.
>> THEY'RE SEEKING INFORMATION
ON WHAT TO DO WITH THEIR
PATIENTS, THEY'RE SEEKING
INFORMATION ON WASTE DISPOSAL.
THEY'RE ALSO SEEKING INFORMATION
ON PROTOCOLS IN THE EVENT THAT
THEY DO RECEIVE AN EBOLA
PATIENT.
>> Reporter: THE QUESTIONS ARE
FIELDED BY OTHERS, ABOUT 150 IN
ALL WHO WORK IN THIS HIGH-TECH
HUB.
PLASMA SCREENS DISPLAY GIANT
MAPS PINPOINTING PLACES THE
VIRUS HAS BEEN FOUND AND AREAS
WHERE EVEN MORE C.D.C. STAFF
HAVE BEEN DEPLOYED.
>> GOOD MORNING, EVERYBODY.
WELL COME TO MONDAY.
DININE OF THE E.O.C. ACTIVATION.
>> Reporter: TOP MANAGERS MEET
DAILY TO EXCHANGE UPDATES ON THE
NUMBER OF CASES AND THE GLOBAL
RESPONSE.
DR. BARBARA MANN ATTENDS THAT
MEETING.
HER TEAM IS MONITORING THE TEXAS
INVESTIGATION INTO THE FIRST
CASE DIAGNOSED IN THE U.S. AND
TRACKING PEOPLE WHO MAY HAVE
BEEN IN CONTACT WITH THOMAS
DUNCAN.
AFTER SERIOUS MISSTEPS IN
DALLAS, THE C.D.C. AND OTHERS
FACE ADD FLURRY OF CRITICISM
INCLUDING THE HOSPITAL'S
RESPONSE WHEN DUNCAN ARRIVED.
>> THIS IS THE WAY I LOOK AT IT
IS THAT PREPAREDNESS IS REALLY A
PROCESS, IT'S NOT A STAGE OR AN
ACTIVITY.
IT'S A PROCESS, A STATE OF MIND.
SO WHAT WE NEED TO DO IN THIS
SITUATION IS TO LEARN EVERYTHING
WE CAN TO TRY TO MAKE IT GO
BETTER.
HOPEFULLY THERE WON'T BE, BUT IF
THERE IS ANOTHER CASE.
>> Reporter: THE C.D.C.'S
ATTENTION GOES WELL BEYOND THE
U.S. BORDER.
THE GLOBAL MIGRATION GROUP
FOCUSES ON AIR AND SEA TRAVEL,
INCLUDING OUTREACH TO
PASSENGERS.
THE GROUP'S LEADER IS DR. MARTY
SE ETRON.
>> THE MOST IMPORTANT THING
WE'RE TRYING TO DO IS HELP FILL
IN A GAP BETWEEN THE PUBLIC
HEALTH SECTOR AND TRANSPORTATION
SECTOR IN TERMS OF READINESS,
OUR JOB IS TO TRAIN PEOPLE TO
ASK QUESTIONS ABOUT SYMPTOMS,
HOW TO ASK QUESTIONS ABOUT
EXPOSURE, RISK, WHETHER THEY HAD
CONTACT WITH AN EBOLA CASE AND
HOW TO MEASURE OBJECTIVELY IN A
SAFE WAY TEMPERATURES OF PEOPL
WHO ARE INTENDING TO LEAVE,
IDENTIFY THOSE PEOPLE AND MOVE
THEM OUT AND PREVENT SICK PEOPLE
FROM GETTING ON AIRPLANES THAT
COULD POTENTIALLY SPREAD.
>> ARE YOU FOCUSING MOSTLY ON
LIBERIA?
>> NO, ALL OF THE --
>> Reporter: EPIDEMIOLOGIST
AMY SUMMERS IS A DISEASE
DETECTIVE JUST BACK FROM
LIBERIA.
MORE PEOPLE HAVE DIED THERE THAN
ANY OTHER COUNTRY.
SUMMERS HAD TO FIND THOSE THAT
MAY HAVE BEEN EXPOSED, A PROCESS
CALLED CONTACT TRACING.
>> THERE ARE A LOT OF CHALLENGES
IN LIBERIA AND I THINK PROBABLY
THE HOST CHALLENGING PART OF IT
IS THAT THERE'S A LOT OF STIGMA
ATTACHED TO PEOPLE THERE, SO
PEOPLE ARE BASICALLY RUNNING
AWAY BECAUSE NOBODY WANT TO BE
ASSOCIATED WITH IT, SO THERE IS
ONE CASE THAT WE WENT OUT WITH
AND, BY THE TIME WE GOT THERE,
ALL OF THE CONTACTS OF THAT CASE
HAD FLED THE AREA.
>> THOSE IN WEST AFRICA PROCESS
SPECIMENS TO DETERMINE IF
PATIENTS HAD EBOLA.
IN ATLANTA SCIENTISTS ARE
WORKING ON GENETIC SEQUENCING TO
SEE IF THE VIRUS CHANGES.
>> I WORRY WHEN PEOPLE HAVE
IRRATIONAL FEARS OF EBOLA BUT
THERE ARE RACIAL FEARS AS WELL.
IF YOU ARE A HEALTHCARE WORKER
TAKING CARE OF A PATIENT WITH
EBOLA YOU BETTER BE SCARED AND
USE THAT FEAR TO MAKE SURE THAT
YOU DO ABSOLUTELY EVERYTHING
RIGHT WHEN YOU'RE CARING FOR
THAT PATIENT.
>> WELL, YOU CAN GO OVER TO
THE --
>> Reporter: THE C.D.C. HAS
SENT SCORES OF ITS OWN STAFF TO
AFRICA, BUT MANY MORE ARE
NEEDED.
THAT'S WHY THEY'RE OFFERING
HANDS-ON EXERCISES LIKE THIS ONE
IN ALABAMA EARLIER THIS WEEK.
36 HEALTH CARE WORKERS CAME TO
THIS RURAL SPOT TO LEARN HOW TO
PUT ON PERSONAL PROTECTIVE
EQUIT, MASKS, BOOTS
AND GLOVES.
DR. MICHAEL YOUNG, AN INFLUENZA
EXPERT WHO TURNED HIS FOCUS TO
EBOLA PUT THE CURRICULUM
TOGETHER.
>> WHAT WE TRY TO DO IS CREATE A
FACILITY HERE THATCS AN
EBOLA TREATMENT UNIT IN WEST
AFRICA.
WE'RE NOT TRYING TO RE-CREATE A
U.S. HOSPITAL WHERE THERE'S MUCH
HIGHER LEVELS OF TECHNOLOGY
AVAILABLE, AND WE'RE NOT TRYING
TO RE-CREATE A GENERAL HOSPITAL
IN WEST AFRICA.
IT'S A SPECIFIC FACILITY FOR
CARING FOR EBOLA PATIENTS.
WHAT WE ASK OUR STUDENTS TO DO
IS DO A PRACTICAL, HAND-ON
EXERCISE EVERY DAY OF THE
THREE-DAY COURSE.
TODAY THEY DID A SIMULATED BLOOD
DRAW.
>> FOR THE NURSE, DRAWING BLOOD
IS EASY BUT WEARING HEAVY GEAR
MAY BE TOUGHER WHEN SHE LEAVES
FOR LIBERIA THIS WEEKEND.
>> IT'S WARM HERE.
IT'S HOT IN WEST AFRICA.
IT'S A CHALLENGE BEING ABLE TO
SEE WHEN IT FOGS.
IT'S A CHALLENGE, THE DEXTERITY
OF YOUR HANDS WHEN YOU HANDLE
ANY FLUIDS THAT COULD POSSIBLY
INFECT YOU IS MOST IMPORTANT AND
MAKING SURE THAT YOU DO THAT
SAFELY.
>> Reporter: CAPTAIN PAUL REED
WILL BE IN CHARGE OF CLINICAL
OPERATIONS AT THE NEW HOSPITAL
THE U.S. IS BUILDING IN LIBERIA.
THE PUBLIC HEALT PUBLIC HEALTH R
HAS BEEN DEPLOYED TO HOT SPOTS
MANY TIMES BUT, FOR THE FATHER
OF FOUR THIS, ASSIGNMENT FEELS
DIFFERENT.
>> MY FAMILY IS USED TO ME
TRAVELING AND BEING DEPLOYED
OVER A LONG PERIOD OF TIME, A
20-YEAR CAREER.
THIS ONE HAS A LITTLE BIT
DIFFERENT FLAVOR, OBVIOUSLY, AND
THERE'S SOME ANXIETY ON THE PART
OF MY FAMILY AS YOU CAN IMAGINE,
BUT THEY KNOW I WILL BE SMART
ABOUT WHAT NEEDS TO BE DONE AND
I'M SAFE AS WELL AS THE FOLKS
I'M TAKING CARE OF ARE SAFE.
>> Reporter: BUT TRAINING
DOESN'T HAPPEN OVERNIGHT.
THE CHALLENGE IS KEEPING PACE
WITH THE FAST-MOVING EPIDEMIC.
>> WE CAN RUN 35 TO 40 STUDENTS
PER COURSE.
WE CAN RUN ONE COURSE PER WEEK.
WE INTEND TO RUN A COURSE EVERY
WEEK UNTIL THE DEMAND GOES AWAY
AND THAT TAKES A YEAR OR TWO,
WE'LL RUN IT FOR A YEAR OR TWO.
>> A SINGLE LAPS CAN RESULT IN
AN INFECTION OF A HEALTHCARE
WORKER SO WE WANT TO MAKE SURE
IT'S DONE WELL AND THAT'S WHY
WE'RE DOING THIS DETAILED,
IN-DEPTH TRAINING FOR ANYONE WHO
WANTS TO ASSIST WITH THE
RESPONSE AS AN INITIAL TRAINING.
BUT ALSO THE STAKES ARE SO HIGH
IN AFRICA, IF WE DON'T STOP IT
IN WEST AFRICA, THE RISK OF IT
SPREADING TO OTHER PARTS OF
AFRICA IS VERY GREAT.
AND IF THAT HAPPENS, IT COULD BE
AROUND FOR YEARS AND A GLOBAL
THREAT FOR YEARS, AND THAT WOULD
HAVE IMPACT ON HOW WE DO MEDICAL
CARE IN THIS COUNTRY, THAT WOULD
HAVE IMPACT ON TRAVEL AND TRADE
AND ECONOMIES AND POLITICAL
STABILITY.
SO THE STAKES ARE VERY HIGH.
>> Reporter: THOSE HIGH STAKES
DRIVE THE C.D.C. EFFORT, BUT THE
QUESTION REMAINS, CAN THE AGENCY
MOVE FAST ENOUGH TO COMBAT THE
WORST EBOLA OUTBREAK THE WORLD
HAS EVER SEEN?
>> Woodruff: ONLINE, YOU CAN
HEAR MORE FROM THE HEALTHCARE
WORKERS AND WHAT'S GOING THROUGH
THEIR MINDS AS THEY PREPARE TO
GO TO WEST AFRICA AT
pbs.org/NewsHour.
>> Woodruff: PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
MEETING AT THE PENTAGON TODAY
COMES AS THERE ARE CONSIDERABLE
DOUBTS OVER WHETHER THE U.S.-LED
COALITION CAN STOP AND ROLL BACK
THE ISLAMIC STATE GROUP'S
ADVANCES.
TO HELP ASSESS THE CAMPAIGN
AGAINST THE MILITANT GROUP, I'M
JOINED BY MICHELE FLOURNOY,
FORMER UNDERSECRETARY OF DEFENSE
FOR POLICY DURING THE FIRST TERM
OF THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION.
SHE'S NOW CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER AT THE CENTER FOR A NEW
AMERICAN SECURITY.
AND DEREK HARVEY HE WAS AN
INTELLIGENCE OFFICER AND SPECIAL
ADVISER TO THE COMMANDER OF U.S.
FORCES IN IRAQ.
HE'S NOW DIRECTOR FOR THE GLOBAL
INITIATIVE ON CIVIL SOCIETY AND
CONFLICT AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
SOUTH FLORIDA.
WE WELL COME BOTH OF YOU -- WE
WELCOME BOTH OF YOU BACK TO THE
PROGRAM.
DEREK HARVEY, FIRST THE REPORTS
WE HAD EARLIER IN THE PROGRAM
ARE IT LOOKS AS IF THE TOWN OF
KOBANI ON SYRIA'S BORDER WITH
TURKEY MAY BE ABOUT TO FALL TO
THE ISLAMIC STATE.
IS THAT WHAT YOU'RE HEARING AND,
IF SO, HOW BIG A LOSS IS THIS?
>> WELL, I THINK THAT'S WHAT IS
HAPPENING IN KOBANI AND IT'S
UNFORTUNATE FOR THAT POPULATION
THERE.
THERE IS SIGNIFICANT OFFENSIVE
ACTIVITY BY THE ISLAMIC STATE.
THEY'RE USING COMBINED ARMS --
TANKS, MORTARS, ARTILLERY AND
INFANTRY DNR AND THEY'RE COMING
IN ON A CITY FROM AT LEAST THREE
DIRECTIONS.
IT IS EXPECTED TO FALL SOME TIME
IN THE NEXT THREE TO FIVE DAYS
ACCORDING TO THE SOURCE I'M
TALKING TO.
>> Woodruff: AND HOW BIG A
LOSS, MICHELE FLOURNOY, IF THIS
HAPPENS?
>> I THINK IT'S WORSENED BECAUSE
IT IS RIGHT UP AGAINST TH THE
TURKISH BORDER AND THAT WILL
CAUSE CROSS BORDER INCURSIONS IN
SOME AREAS.
SO IT'S OF CONCERN BUT I THINK
WE HAVE TO BE REALISTIC IN OUR
EXPECTATIONS.
THIS CAMPAIGN WON'T BE ABLE TO
STOP EVERY I.S.I.S. MOVEMENT OR
TO ROLL THEM BACK IN EVERY
PLACE.
WHERE WE NEED TO FOCUS IS REALLY
ON THE MOST STRATEGIC AREAS AND
BUILDING UP THE GROUND FORCES
THAT CAN RETAKE AND HOLD
TERRITORY.
AIR ROT DO THAT.
>> Woodruff: SECRETARY OF
STATE KERRY WAS AS SAYING
IT WOULDN'T BE A STRATEGIC
DEFEAT IF KOBANI GOES DOWN.
COLONEL HARVEY, DO YOU AGREE?
>> I THINK IT'S SIGNIFICANT IF
KOBANI GOES DOWN JUST LIKE IT'S
SIGNATURE WHEN WE LOST MOSUL AND
YOU HAVE THE HUMANITARIAN CRISIS
AND THE MASSACRES THAT ENSUES
FROM THAT, AND WE HAVE THE
CAPABILITY TO INTERCEDE TO HAVE
AN IMPACT LIKE WE DID NOT TAKE
IN THE CASE OF THE  YIDSIES.
IF I WAS TO GIVE THIS CAMPAIGN A
GRADE TO DATE.
IT'S A D, MAYBE D PLUS.
IT LACKS INTENSITY.
IT ISN'T DRIVING THE ENEMY IN A
WAY THAT WE NEED IT TO.
IT'S TAKING SOME INITIATIVE
AWAY.
IT'S DEGRADED THEM SOME, BUT,
OVERALL, I.S.I.S. CONTINUES TO
ACT LIKE A Pac-MAN IN THE
VIDEO GAME, IMPOSSIBLING UP
TERRITORY IN SYRIA AND IN IRAQ,
AND THAT'S SOMETHING THAT IS
GOING TO CONTINUE TO HAPPEN,
UNLESS WE CHANGE THE AIRAMPAIGNE
INTENSITY, RESOURCING AND
IMPROVE INTELLIGENCE.
>> Woodruff: MICHELE FLOURNOY,
WHAT DOES IT SAY THAT THIS TOWN
AND OTHER PARTS OF SYRIA AND
IR GOING DOWN DESPITE THIS
AIR CAMPAIGN ON THE PART OF THE
U.S. AND ITS ALLIES?
>> I AGREE WE SHOULD RAMP UP THE
INTENSITY OF THE AIR CAMPAIGN
AND TRY TO BE MORE PRO ACTIVE
AND GET OUT AHEAD OF SOME OF
I.S.I.S.'S MOSTLY AND SO FORTH,
BUT WHAT'S REALLY GOING TO MAKE
A DIFFERENCE ON THE GROUND IS
WHEN THE IRAQIS ARE ABLE, WITH
OUR HELP AND OUR SUPPORT, TO
REALLY START ENGAGING ON THE
GROUND WHEN THE KURDS AND THE
SYRIAN OPPOSITION FORCES ARE
ABLE TO ENGAGE ON THE GROUND.
THE PROBLEM IS THAT IS GOING TO
TAKE TIME, RECONSTITUTING THE
FORCES, ENABLING THEM TO BE
FULLY EFFECTIVE WILL TAKE TIME
AND THAT'S THE FRUSTRATING PART
NOW.
>> Woodruff: WHAT DOES THAT
WAITING T MEAN, COLONEL
HARVEY?
>> I THINK WE'RE LOOKING AT A
YEAR OR MORE, AND THAT'S GOING
TO BE UNFORTUNATE FOR THE PEOPLE
OF IRAQ AND SYRIA, BUT IT'S ALSO
GOING TO GIVE THE ISLAMIC STATE
A GREAT DEAL OF OPPORTUNITY TO
ENTRENCH THEMSELVES, TO IMPROVE
THEIR CAPABILITIES AND MAKE IT
THAT MUCH HARDER FOR US TO DIG
THEM OUT IN THESE COMMUNITIES
THAT THEY'RE BECOMING WELL
ENTRENCHED IN, IN IRAQ AND
SYRIA.
A YEAR OR MORE IS TOO LONG, AND
WE JUST HAVE NOT PUT THE
RESOURCES IN PLACE TO SUPPORT
BUILDING IRAQI SECURITY FORCES
OR PARTNERING WITH SUNNI-ARAB
TRIBES IN BOTH IRAQ AND SYRIA IN
ORDER TO BUILD THE CAPABILITY
FOR A FORCE ON THE GROUND THAT
WE CAN WORK WITH.
IT'S A MISSING COMPONENT AND
THERE'S NOT ENOUGH ENERGY AND
EFFORT INTO THIS AT THIS POINT.
>> Woodruff: MICHELE FLOURNOY,
DOES THIS PUT PRESSURE ON THE
ADMINISTRATION TO EITHER FIND A
WAY TO GET BOOTS ON THE GROUND
BY THE U.S. OR GET BOOTS ON THE
GROUND FASTER BY COUNTRIES IN
THE REGION?
>> I THINK THE PRESSURE IS TO
ACTUALLY MOVE THE ADVISE AND
ASSIST AND TRAINING WITH THE
IRAQIS FASTER AND AS COLONEL
HARVEY SAID TO MORE FULLY ENGAGE
THE SUNNI TRIBES TO TRY TO GET
THEM TO START TAKING ON I.S.I.L.
I DON'T THINK THE ANSWER IS
LARGE CONVENTIONAL U.S. GROUND
BONDS BECAUSE ULTIMATELY YOU
HAVE TO HAVE THE INDIGENOUS
FOLKS ON THE GROUND OWNING THIS
TO BE A SUSTAINABLE OUTCOME.
>> Woodruff: HARVEY, YOU TALK
TO PEOPLE IN THE MILITARY, WHAT
SS OF THIS AIRG ABOUT HOW THEY
CAMPAIGN AND, FROM ANOTHER
PERSPECTIVE, WE'RE HEARING, NOW,
COMPLAINTS OF A DIFFERENT SORT
IN IRAQ, THE U.S. EMPLOYING
APACHE HELICOPTERS, SOMETHING
THAT WASN'T EXPECTED.
WHAT ARE THE PERSPECTIVES YOU'RE
HEARING FROM FOLKS YOU'RE
TALKING TO?
>> THERE'S FRUSTRATION ABOUT THE
INABILITY TO BRING RESOURCES TO
BEAR TO A FIGHT THAT WE HAVE
THAT WE CAN ENGAGE WITH.
THE INTENSITY AS MICHELE HAS
TALKED ABOUT IS NOT THERE.
WE DON'T EVEN HAVE AC-130
GUNSHIPS DEPLOYED WHICH ARE
IDEAL FOR THIS TYPE OF COMBAT IN
THIS TYPE OF THEATER.
SO THERE'S A LOT LEFT ON THE
TABLE THAT COMMANDERS WOULD LIKE
TO BE ABLE TO ENGAGE IN ORDER TO
IMPROVE THE AIR CAMPAIGN.
SECONDLY, THE ATTACK AVIATION
THAT CAME OUT OF BAGHDAD
INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT, ENTERING
A NATION IN AN ATTACK MANNER IS
INCREDIBLY IMPORTANT IN THIS
ENVIRONMENT AND A CAPABILITY
THEY WOULD LIKE TO HAVE BUT IT
BRINGS RISK.
THE RISK IS HELICOPTERS ARE MORE
VULNERABLE TO GROUND FIRE.
IF YOU LOSE A HELICOPTER IN THIS
ENVIRONMENT, YOU WILL HAVE TO
HAVE A QUICK REACTION CE
GET IN THERE AND EXTRACT THE
PEOPLE.
YOU WILL HAVE TO HAVE MEDIVAC.
THAT PUTS THE OTHER ELEMENTS AT
RISK.
YOU NEED THE CAPABILITIES IN
PLACE.
I'M AFRAID OF A MO MOGADISHU
INCIDENT THAT DOES NOT PLAY WELL
INTERNATIONALLY AND AT HOME.
IT'S A SIGNIFICANT PROBLEM IF WE
DO THIS.
>> Woodruff: I WANT TO COME
BACK TO HIS COMMENT THAT FOLKS
IN THE MILITARY ARE TELLING HIM
THERE IS CAPACITY LEFT ON THE
TABLE BY THE U.S.
>> I THINK THAT'S OFTEN TRUE IN
OPERATIONS.
THE QUESTION IS, YOU KNOW,
ALIGNING THAT WITH A STRATEGY,
AND I THINK HERE THERE HAS TO BE
A DISCUSSION ABOUT WHETHER
THERE'S MORE WE SHOULD BE DOING,
WHETHER THE RISK OF DOING MORE
IS ACCEPTABLE, AND WHETHER IT
REALLY FUNDAMENTALLY CHANGES THE
TIMELINE.
CAN WE GET TO REAL PROGRESS
AGAINST I.S.I.S. ON THE GROUND
INSIDE OF A YEAR?
NOT A FULL YEAR, BUT BRINGING
THE TIME LINE FORWARD, THAT'S
THE REAL QUESTION.
>> TOUGH QUESTIONS.
MICHELE FLOURNOY, COLONEL DEREK
HARVEY, WE THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: NOW, TO GAY MARRIAGE,
AN ISSUE THAT'S ONCE AGAIN
ROILING REPUBLICAN POLITICS FOR
THE MID-TERM ELECTIONS AND
BEYOND.
FEDERAL COURTS HAVE BEEN
STRIKING DOWN GAY MARRIAGE BANS
RIGHT AND LEFT, AND THEN ON
MONDAY, THE SUPREME COURT
STEPPED IN, AGAIN.
THE JUSTICES REFUSED TO HEAR
APPEALS FROM FIVE STATES THAT
WANTED TO KEEP BANNING SAM-SEX
MARRIAGE.
SIX OTHER STATES ARE ALSO
AFFECTED BY THE COURT'S REFUSAL.
COMPETITIVE SENATE RACES ARE
UNDERWAY IN AT LEAST FIVE STATES
WHERE GAY MARRIAGES ARE OR COULD
SOON NOW BE LEGAL, VIRGINIA,
COLORADO, KANSAS, NORTH
CAROLINA AND IN WEST VIRGINIA,
WHERE REPUBLICAN SHELLEY MOORE
CAPITO IS RUNNING AGAINST
DEMOCRAT NATALIE TENNANT FOR THE
SEAT BEING VACATED BY JAY
ROCKEFELLER.
SHE ADDRESSED THE ISSUE IN A
DEBATE LAST NIGHT.
>> MY VOTING RECORD AND MY
PERSONAL BELIEF IS THAT MARRIAGE
IS BETWEEN A MAN AND WOMAN AND I
HAVE A LONG HISTORY ON THAT
DATING BACK TO WHEN I WAS IN THE
WEST VIRGINIA LEGISLATURE.
BUT I BELIEVE THE DECISION
THAT'S BEEN MADE IS BASICALLY
SAYING THAT THE STATES WILL MAKE
THEIR OWN DECISIONS, AND I WILL
ABIDE BY WHAT THE STATE OF WEST
VIRGINIA DECIDES IN THIS MATTER.
>> Ifill: BUT A FAULT LINE HAS
ALREADY DEVELOPED AMONG
REPUBLICANS.
TEXAS SENATOR TED CRUZ, WHO MAY
RUN FOR PRESIDENT IN 2016, IS
CRITICIZING THE COURT ITSELF.
>> WE SHOULDN'T HAVE UN-ELECTED
JUDGES STRIKING DOWN OUR
MARRIAGE LAWS TRYING TO IMPOSE
THEIR PUBLIC POLICY NOTION, ON
THE STATE OF TEXAS AND ON STATES
WHERE THE ELECTED LEGISLATURE
WHERE STATES HAVE MADE THE
DECISION TO PRESERVE AND PROTECT
TRADITIONAL MARRIAGE.
>> Ifill: FAR FROM ENDING THE
POLITICAL PART OF THE GAY
MARRIAGE DEBATE, MONDAY'S ACTION
SEEMS TO HAVE REIGNITED IT.
ANOTHER FEDERAL APPEALS COURT
STRUCK DOWN BANS ON GAY MARRIAGE
IN IDAHO AND NEVADA YESTERDAY.
BUT AT THE COURT TODAY, JUSTICE
ANTHONY KENNEDY IMMEDIATELY
GRANTED IDAHO'S EMERGENCY
PETITION TO DELAY ACTION.
WE TAKE A CLOSER LOOK AT THE
POLITICAL AND LEGAL LANDSCAPE
SURROUNDING SAME-SEX MARRIAGE
WITH:
JONATHAN ALLEN, WASHINGTON
BUREAU CHIEF FOR "BLOOMBERG
NEWS."
JONATHAN, DID THE SUPREME
COURT'S ACTION FORCE THIS ON TO
THE MID-TERM ELECTION AGENDA?
>> ABSOLUTELY, AS YOU SHOWED
JUST A MOMENT AGO, IT'S ALREADY
SOMETHING THAT'S BEING DISCUSSED
IN SENATE DEBATES.
WITHIN 24 HOURS OF THE DECISION,
YOU HAD POLITICAL CANDIDATES
TALKING ABOUT IT, FEELING THEY
HAD TO.
I THINK THE PARTIES,
PARTICULARLY THE REPUBLICAN
PARTY COMMITTEES DON'T WANT TO
TALK ABOUT IT BUT THE CANDIDATES
WILL HAVE TO.
IT'S MOVED OUT OF THE COURT
SYSTEM AND BACK INTO THE
POLITICAL ARENA.
>> Ifill: WHAT ARE THE REASON
FOR THE REPUBLICANS AND
DEMOCRATS NOT WANT TO TALK ABOUT
IT?
>> THE BIG REASON FOR
REPUBLICANS TO NOT WANT TO TALK
ABOUT IT IS THE AMERICAN PUBLIC
HAS SHIFTED ON THIS ISSUE.
IF YOU LOOK AT GALLUP POLLING IN
2006, 42% OF AMERICANS APPROVED
OF SAME-SEX MARRIAGE.
NOW YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT 56%.
THERE'S BEEN A CHANGE OVER THE
LAST FEW YEARS, YOU CAN SEE IT
IN THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY PRIMARY
IN 2008.
THE MAJOR CANDIDATES SAID THEY
WERE FOR CIVIL UNIONS OR
DOMESTIC PARTNER BENEFITS BUT
WOULDN'T EMBRACE SAME-SEX
MARRIAGE.
NOW IN 2014, LOOKING AT 2016,
ALL OF THE MAJOR DEMOCRATIC
CANDIDATES ARE GOING TO BE IN
FAVOR OF SAME-SEX MARRIAGE.
SO YOU'VE SEEN THAT HAPPEN THAT
WAY, A BIG SHIFT IN PUBLIC
OPINION.
AS FAR AS REPUBLICANS GO,
THERE'S A DIVISION IN THEIR
PARTY BETWEEN THOSE WHO WANT TO
PROMOTE TRADITIONAL MARRIAGE AND
THOSE WHO THINK THAT THIS IS AN
ISSUE THAT HAS ALREADY PASSED
THEM BY.
WE SAW MIKE HUCKABEE THE FORMER
GOVERNOR OF ARKANSAS AND FORMER
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE STAND
WITH TED CRUZ AND SAY, LOOK, I
WANT TO STAND WITH A PARTY THAT
HAS GUTS TO FIGHT ON THIS ISSUE.
IT'S NOT OVER, AND IF THE
REPUBLICAN PARTY WON'T FIGHT ON
IT, HE SAID HE'S GOING TO BECOME
AN INDEPENDENT.
>> Ifill: LET'S TALK ABOUT
ANOTHER WELL-KNOWN CONSERVATIVE
ALSO KEEPING HIS EYE ON 2016,
THE GOVERNOR OF LOUISIANA, BOBBY
JINDAL.
HE'S NOT SAYING WHAT TED CRUZ IS
SAYING.
>> YEAH, I MEAN, THERE ARE
POSITIONS ALL OVER THE PLACE
RIGHT NOW.
I THINK THIS IS A PROBLEM FOR
THE REPUBLICAN PARTY.
IT'S VERY DIVIDED AND I THINK
YOU'RE GOING TO SEE SOME
LONG-TIME CONSERVATIVES TAKE A
DIFFERENT POSITION ON SAME-SEX
MARRIAGE IF THEY'RE RUNNING FOR
PRESIDENT IN 2016 THAN HAS
TRADITIONALLY BEEN THE PARTY'S
MESSAGE.
ROB PORTMAN, OHIO CONSERVATIVE
IN THE SENATE, SOMEBODY LIKING
AT 2016, HE WAS THE FIRST
REPUBLICAN IN THE SENATE TO
SUPPORT SAME-SEX MARRIAGE AFTER
HIS SON REVEALED HE WAS GUY THEN
HE CAME OUT AND SUPPORTED IT.
SO THERE'S A REPUBLICAN PARTY
STRUGGLING WITH THE ISSUE.
I THINK THE DEMOCRATS DON'T WANT
THE TALK ABOUT IT AT THE MOMENT
BECAUSE YOU HAVE A LOT OF TOUGH
RACES IN SWING STATES WHERE GAY
MARRIAGE IS NOT AS APPROVED AS
MENTION ACE ON THE NATIONAL
LEVEL AND I THINK THE DEMOCRATIC
PARTY COMMITTEES DON'T WANT TO
HURT CANDIDATES IN THOSE PLACES
BY TRUMPETING THOSE ISSUES.
>> Ifill: IS THERE A
COMPARISON TO BE DRAWN?
REMINDS ME OF WHAT THE PARTIES
ARE DRAWING ON IMMIGRATION WHERE
THEY DISAGREE AND WANT TO MOVE
TO SOMETHING ELSE.
>> THAT'S SOMETHING YOU'RE
SEEING.
YOU'RE SEEING IN THE REPUBLICAN
PARTY THERE'S DIVISION
IMMIGRATION AND A PORTION OF THE
PARTY THAT THINKS IT REALLY HAS
TO GET INTO THE SORT OF
SITUATION WHERE YOU ARE
LEGALIZING FOLKS WHO HAVE BEEN
HERE AND THEN ANOTHER PORTION OF
THE PARTY.
THE DEMOCRATS, OVERWHELMING
SENATE VOTE FOR COMPREHENSIVE
IMMIGRATION REFORM THAT DOES
BORDER SECURITY AND TEMPORARY
WORKERS AND THE LEGALIZATION
PROCESS.
SO I THINK THAT'S AN ISSUE
DEMOCRATS ARE COMFORTABLE WITH
AND REPUBLICANS ARE HAVING A
HARD TIME WITH, EXCEPT FOR
D.P.S. IN CERTAIN SWING STATES
WHERE THAT ISSUE ISN'T HELPFUL
TO THEM.
>> Ifill: THE SUPREME COURT
RULED ON THE HOBBY LOBBY CASE, A
FREE SPEECH AND RELIGIOUS CASE,
AND PEOPLE SAID THE CULTURE WARS
ARE BACK.
NOW THEY ARE NOT TO RULE ON GAY
MARRIAGE, AT LEAST FOR NOW.
SEEMS LIKE THE CULTURE WARS ARE
OVER OR ARE WE GOING TOO FAST?
>> I THINK THE CULTURE WARS ARE
BACK.
USED TO BE THE REPUBLICANS WERE
EFFECTIVELY USING SOCIAL ISSUES
AGAINST DEMOCRATS AS A WEDGE,
THEY SPLIT THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY.
WHAT YOU'VE SEEN MORE RECENTLY
IS A PENDULUM SHIFT WHERE
DEMOCRATS FIGURED OUT HOW TODOM
UNIFIED ON MAJOR SOCIAL ISSUES,
WHETHER ABORTION OR SAME-SEX
MARRIAGE, AND USE THEM AGAINST A
MORE DIVIDED REPUBLICAN PARTY.
EACH PARTY IS TRYING TO
CALIBRATE, TRYING TO RESET,
REFRAME AND TO FIND CONSENSUS
AND UNION.
RIGHT NOW REPUBLICANS DON'T HAVE
IT ON THE MAJOR SOCIAL ISSUES
AND YOU WILL CONTINUE TO HEAR
DEMOCRATS TALK ABOUT THOSE
ISSUES.
I THINK THEY REALLY INVITE AND
EMBRACE THE CULTURE WARS NOW IN
A WAY THAT THEY DIDN'T JUST
EIGHT OR TEN YEARS AGO.
>> Ifill: A LOT OF CALIBRATION
BETWEEN NOW AND NOVEMBER.
JONATHAN ALLEN OF BLOOMBERG
NEWS.
THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: MY PLEASURE.
>> Woodruff: NEXT, DO AMERICANS
EXPECT TOO MUCH FROM THEIR
PRESIDENTS?
AND, WHAT MAKES A GREAT
COMMANDER IN CHIEF?
MARGARET WARNER EXPLORES THOSE
QUESTIONS WITH THE AUTHOR OF A
NEW BOOK.
>> Warner: AARON DAVID MILLER IS
KNOWN FOR HIS DECADES OF WORK ON
U.S. DIPLOMACY IN THE MIDDLE
EAST IN FOUR ADMINISTRATIONS.
BUT NOW HE'S RETURNED TO HIS
TRAINING IN AMERICAN HISTORY
WITH A NEW BOOK: "THE END OF
GREATNESS: WHY AMERICA CAN'T
HAVE (AND DOESN'T WANT) ANOTHER
GREAT PRESIDENT."
HE ARGUES THERE HAVE ONLY BEEN
THREE TRULY GREAT PRESIDENTS,
GEORGE WASHINGTON, ABRAHAM
LINCOLN, AND FRANKLIN ROOSEVELT.
AND THAT AMERICANS SHOULD STOP
SEARCHING FOR ANOTHER ONE.
WE SPOKE AT MOUNT VERNON, HOME
OF GEORGE WASHINGTON.
AARON MILLER THANK YOU FOR
JOINING US.
>> PLEASURE MARGARET.
>> Warner: NOW YOU WRITE HERE
THAT AMERICANS NEED TO GET OVER
THEIR OBSESSION OR YOU CALL IT
AN ADDICTION IN THE SEARCH FOR
GREAT PRESIDENT.
WHY?
WHAT IF YOU SEARCH FOR
SOMETHING YOU CAN'T HAVE?
THAT'S THE PREDICAMENT WE'RE IN.
WE'VE CREATED A SENSE OF
EXPECTATION IN A JOB THAT'S
ALREADY SOMEWHAT ALREADY
IMPOSSIBLE.
LET'S SAY IT'S IMPLAUSIBLE,
GIVEN THE NATURE AND THE
COMPLEXITY OF THE PRESIDENCY,
THE TERRIFYING CON I THIN CONTIT
POLITICS, SO MANY FACTORS OUT OF
OUR CONTROL AND WE WANT TO TURN
THE PRESIDENT INTO A COMBINATION
OF HARRISON FORD IN AIR FORCE
ONE AND SUPERMAN.
AND THE REALITY IS WE CAN'T HAVE
PRESIDENTS LIKE THAT ANYMORE.
THAT'S THE REAL ISSUE.
WE HAVE TO STOP PINING FOR THE
PRESIDENTS, THE GREAT TRANCE --
TRANSFORMATIVE ONES BECAUSE
THOSE WON'T COME BACK, SEEMS TO
ME, AND LET THE PRESIDENTS BE
GOOD AND STOP EXPECTING THEM TO
BE GREAT.
>> Warner: WHAT ARE THE THREE
GREATS-- WASHINGTON, LINCOLN,
AND F.D.R.-- HAVE THE OTHERS
DIDN'T OR ACHIEVE THAT THE
OTHERS DIDN'T?
>> TRANSFORMING A NATION COUNTRY
CRISIS.
THAT DEFINES GREATNESS.
WITHOUT CRISIS AND I'M NOT
TALKING ABOUT MARGINAL CRISIS OR
A SERIOUS CRISIS I'M TALKING
ABOUT A CRISIS THAT ENCUMBERS
THE NATION FOR A SUSTAINED
PERIOD OF TIME.
THAT IS WHAT SEPARATES THE
CAPACITY OF THE GREATS.
THE UNDENIABLE GREATS I CALL
THEM THE INDISPENSABLES
WASHINGTON, LINCOLN AND F.D.R.
THE THREE GREATEST CHALLENGES
THE NATION FACED PRODUCED
FORTUNATELY FOR US OUR THREE
GREATEST PRESIDENTS.
>> Warner: BUT YOU ALSO SAY THEY
ALL HAVE THINGS IN COMMON YOU
CALL THEM THE THREE "C'S."
>> I DO.
THE THREE "C'S" OF PRESIDENTIAL
GREATNESS, THE COCKTAIL IF YOU
WILL.
YOU MIX THEM ALL TOGETHER YOU
GET A GREAT PRESIDENT.
FIRST OF ALL, THE CRISIS WHICH
OPENS THE DOOR, THE FOUNDERS
BASICALLY SET IT UP THIS WAY.
THEY WANTED AN ENERGETIC
EXECUTIVE BUT THEY DIDN'T WANT
POWER TO BE IRRESPONSIBLY
COLLECTED.
SO CRISIS IS WHAT OPENS THE
DOOR.
THEN IF YOU HAVE CHARACTER AND
CAPACITY YOU CAN FIGURE OUT WHAT
TO DO WITH THE CRISIS AND THAT
IN ESSENCE IS MY DEFINITION OF A
GREATNESS.
NATION IN CRISIS OUT OF WHICH
THE UNDENIABLES EXTRACT
TRANSFORMATIVE CHANGE WHICH
FUNDAMENTALLY ALTERS THE NATION
FOR THE BETTER.
>> AND WHAT IS THE ESSENTIAL
CHARACTER THAT'S NEEDED?
>> THE INTERNAL DEFINITION OF
CHARACTER, THE WORLD DRIVE THE
AMBITION, TO HARNEST FUTURES TO
A BRIGHTER ENTERPRISE, YOU PUT
THAT TOGETHER AND GET MY
DEFINITION OF CHARACTER WHICH IS
A P
YOU PUT THAT TOGETHER AND YOU
GET MY DEFINITION OF CHARACTER
WHICH PRODUCES A PRETTY
COMPELLING PERSONALITY EVEN
THOUGH WE COULDN'T IN THE CASE
OF WASHINGTON AND LINCOLN SEE
THEM OR HEAR THEM.
>> Warner: GO BACK TO YOUR POINT
ABOUT THE FACT THAT OUR SEARCH
FOR GREATNESS IN A PRESIDENT
THAT KEEPS THEM FROM BEING GOOD
WHAT DO YOU MEAN BY THAT?
>> WE HAVE A CARDBOARD,
CARTOONISH VIEW OF LEADERSHIP,
GREAT MAN, AND SOME BIG WOMAN IS
ELECTED.
HIGH PRINCIPAL, LOFTY VISION,
GREAT REPETITION AND SOMEHOW BY
FORCE OF PERSONALITY WHERE REAL
CHANGE HAPPENS THAT'S NOT THE
WAY THAT CHANGE HAPPENS IN
AMERICA.
>> Warner: DOES IT AFFECT THE
WAY THEY APPROACH THINGS?
>> YEAH, YOU HAVE TO READ THE
REAL ESTATE CORRECTLY ALRIGHT.
LINCOLN INHERITED THE MOST
PROFOUND CRISIS OF ANY
PRESIDENT, HE ALSO MIDWAY DURING
HIS TENURE BELIEVED HE COULD
EXTRACT A TRANSFORMATIVE CHANGE
OUT OF IT.
IT WAS EMANCIPATION.
HE WAITED FOR THE EXACT MOMENT
AND HE DRESSED IT UP NOT HAS
SOME TRANSFORMATIVE DECLARATION
PRINCIPLE BUT AS A WAR MEASURE.
THE EMANCIPATION PROCLAMATION.
BARACK OBAMA INHERITS TWO
CRISIS, THE GREATEST ECONOMIC
RECESSION SINCE THE GREAT
DEPRESSION, AND THE TWO LONGEST
WARS IN AMERICAN HISTORY, AND
BELIEVES SOMEHOW THE STAGE IS
SET FOR HIS CAPACITY TO
TRANSFORM THE NATION AT HOME AND
ABROAD.
HE MISREAD THE REAL ESTATE.
I'M NOT BLAMING HIM.
EVERY PRESIDENT ASPIRES BUT YOU
NEED TO UNDERSTAND THE REAL
ESTATE AND FIGURE OUT WHAT YOU
CAN DO AND WHAT YOU CAN'T.
>> Warner: NOW, ARE YOU REALLY
PREPARED TO SAY WE WILL NEVER
HAVE ANOTHER GREAT PRESIDENT?
>> IT WOULD BE TERRIFIC IF WE
COULD HAVE WASHINGTON, LINCOLN
AND FDR IN A MODERN GUISE BUT
THE REALITIES I'M PRETTY
CONFIDENT WE CAN'T WHAT WE NEED
ARE GOOD PRESIDENTS AND NOT GOOD
IN THE SENSE GOOD IN THE SENSE
THAT THEY ARE COMPETENT AND
EFFECTIVE.
GOOD IN THE SENSE THAT THEY ARE
MORALLY RESIDENT AND THEY
UNDERSTAND THE LAW.
HARRY TRUMAN ONCE SAID THAT
NIXON READ THE CONSTITUTION BUT
HE REALLY DIDN'T UNDERSTAND IT.
GOOD IN THE SENSE THAT THEY ARE
EMOTIONALLY INTELLIGENT.
THEY ARE NOT HAUNTED BY AND
ASPIRATIONS TO GREATNESS THAT GO
BEYOND THE CAPACITY TO ACHIEVE.
YOU GIVE ME PRESIDENTS LIKE THAT
AND WE WILL BE ON THE WAY TO
GETTING TO ADDRESS SOME OF THE
CRISIS THAT
>> Warner: YOU ARE A MIDDLE EAST
EXPERT YOU SPENT YOUR ENTIRE
CAREER IN THAT DID YOU HAVE ANY
HESITATION ABOUT WADING INTO
THIS GROUND WHERE SO MANY
PRESIDENTIAL HISTORIANS HAVE
TREAD I MEAN SOME PEOPLE MIGHT
SAY FRANKLY WHAT'S AARON
MILLER'S STANDING TO OFFER A
THESIS?
>> IT IS A NATIONAL
CONVERSATION, A CONVERSATION
EVERY AMERICAN HAS THE RIGHT TO
PARTICIPATE IN BECAUSE THE
PRESIDENCY IS OURS, AND I HAVE A
RIGHT, AN INCENTIVE AS ALL OF MY
FELLOW AMERICANS DO TO
PARTICIPATE IN THIS DEBATE AND
TO JUDGE AND EVALUATE OUR
PRESIDENTS, NOT UNREALISTICALLY,
OR AASPIRATIONLY.
I WROTE THE BOOK TO BEGIN A
CONVERSATION.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Warner: AARON MILLER, THANK
YOU.
>> THANKS SO MUCH, MARGARET.
>> Woodruff: WE HAVE MORE FROM
MARGARET'S CONVERSATION WITH
AARON DAVID MILLER, ON WHY, OF
THE THREE GREAT PRESIDENTS, HE
THINKS GEORGE WASHINGTON
ACTUALLY HAD THE HARDEST JOB OF
ALL, THAT'S AT pbs.newshour.org.
>> Ifill: NOW, THE CONTINUING
SEARCH FOR A MISSING JETLINER
THAT CAPTURED THE ATTENTION OF
THE WORLD.
MORE THAN SIX MONTHS AGO,
MALAYSIAN AIRLINES FLIGHT 370
MYSTERIOUSLY DISAPPEARED EN
ROUTE FROM KUALA LUMPUR TO
BEIJING, TRIGGERING A MASSIVE
SEARCH
THE PLANE WAS THOUGHT TO HAVE
CRASHED SOMEWHERE IN OR NEAR THE
SOUTHERN INDIAN OCEAN, WITH 239
PEOPLE ON BOARD.
A NEARLY TWO-MONTH-LONG SEARCH
FOR WRECKAGE AND CLUES PROVED
FUTILE YIELDING NO DEFINITIVE
ANSWERS ABOUT JUST WHAT HAPPENED
TO THE PLANE.
IT'S BEEN MONTHS.
BUT NOW THE SEARCH IS BACK ON.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS MORE.
>> Brown: THE BREAK GAVE
INVESTIGATORS TO CREATE A MAP OF
THE UNDERSTOOD WATER SEABED AND
THE SEARCH WAS RED MONDAY.
THREE SHIPS WILL BE INVOLVED IN
THE NEXT PHASE WHICH COULD LAST
AS LONG AS A YEAR.
SHIPS AND PLANES FROM 14
COUNTRIES SERVED VAST AREAS FROM
THE SOUTH CHINA SEA TO OTHER
REGIONS.
TONIGHT, FOCUSING ON THE
CONTINUING INVESTIGATION AND
MANY QUESTIONS THAT REMAIN AND
THE TECHNOLOGY OF TRACKING
PLANES.
OUR SCIENCE CORRESPONDENT MILES
O'BRIEN IS THE PRODUCER AND
REPORTER FOR THE REPORT TITLED
"WHY PLANES VANISH" AND JOINS ME
FROM BOSTON.
SO, MILES, AS THE SEARCH STARTS,
WHERE DO THINGS STAND?
A WHAT ARE THEY FOCUSED ON NOW?
>> Reporter?THEY'RE FOCUS OPENEG
AREA.
IT'S HARD TO SAY WE'RE NOT STILL
AT SQUARE ONE ON THIS ONE.
THAT'S AN AMAZING THING TO SAY
SO MANY MONTHS AFTER THE LOSS OF
FLIGHT 370.
ENGINEERS IN THIS COMPANY WHICH
OPERATES COMMUNICATIONS
SATELLITES WHICH WAS PART OF
WHAT WAS EQUIPPED ON MH370, WERE
ABLE TO TURN CAPABILITY INTO A
POSITIONING TOOL AND DEFINE THE
LOCATION IN THE SOUTHERN INDIAN
OCEAN AS A SEARCH ZONE FOR THE
FLIGHT WHICH WENT DOWN SEVEN
HOURS AFTER IT DISAPPEARED FROM
RADAR SCREENS.
WE KNOW IT'S IN THE HEMISPHERE
BY VIRTUE OF THE MATHEMATICS BUT
IT'S IN A BIG SWATH, THEY CAN'T
DEFINE A BULLSEYE.
SO WE'VE GOT TO BE READY FOR A
LONG SEARCH HERE.
>> Brown: SO THE MYSTERY OF
WHERE IT IS AND WHAT HAPPENED.
I KNOW YOUR DOCUMENTARY IS
LOOKING AT VARIOUS POSSIBILITIES
OF WHAT MIGHT HAVE HAPPENED FROM
ACCIDENT TO HUMAN INTERVENTION.
HOW MUCH -- IS THE EVIDENCE
POINTING IN ANY PARTICULAR WAY?
>> I WOULDN'T TAKE ANYTHING OFF
THE TABLE YET.
ALL THE SCENARIOS YOU'VE HEARD
AND DISCUSSED ARE STILL IN PLAY,
AS FAR AS I'M CONCERNED.
IT'S VERY DIFFICULT, HOWEVER, TO
WALK AWAY FROM A SCENARIO THAT
DOESN'T INVOLVE SOME SORT OF
DELIBERATE ACTION, A HUMAN
HANDBAG INVOLVED IN SOME WAY.
AFTER IT FELL OFF THE RADAR
SCREENS, IT MADE A 180-DEGREE
TURN BACK TOWARD THE MALAYSIAN
PENINSULA.
THE PLANE TOOK A RIGHT TURN,
THREADED THE NEEDLE BETWEEN
AIRSPACE BETWEEN INDONESIA AND
MALAYSIA AND FLEW OFF PRIMARY
RADAR SCREENS AT THE NORTHERN
TIP OF INDONESIA.
THAT ROUTE DOES NOT BESPEAK A
PLANE THAT IS CRIPPLED AND THE
CREW IS UNABLE TO COMMUNICATE OR
A GHOST PLANE, IF YOU WILL.
THAT TELLS ME SOMEBODY WAS
MANIPULATING CONTROLS.
WHAT WAS HAPPENING BEYOND THAT
IS DIFFICULT TO SAY.
>> Brown: BRINGING THE STORY
FORWARD, YOU'RE LOOKING AT WHAT
CAN BE DONE TO BETTER TRACK
PLANES NOW AND IN THE FUTURE.
WE HAVE A CLIP FROM THE FILM,
IT'S ON THE TECHNOLOGY.
LET'S LOOK AT THAT.
>> HERE THEY'RE USING AUTOMATIC
DEPENDENCE SURVEILLANCE
BROADCAST.
IT IS THE KEYSTONE COMPONENT OF
NEXT GEN, AN AIRCRAFT OUTFITTED
WITH THIS SYSTEM DETERMINES
LOCATION USING G.P.S. AND
TRANSMITS THAT DATA BACK TO
CONTROLLERS VIA RADIO WHICH HAS
A GREATER RANGE THAN RADAR.
BUT STILL, WHEN AN AIRCRAFT
FLIES OVER THE OCEAN, IT WILL BE
OUT OF RANGE.
SO THE INDUSTRY IS TESTING A
SPACE-BASED SYSTEM WHERE PLANES
WILL REPORT TO LOCATIONS VIA
SATELLITE, WHEREVER THEY ARE IN
THE WORLD.
THERE ARE NUMEROUS TECHNICAL
DETAILS THAT NEED TO BE WORKED
OUT, BUT ADSB COULD EVENTUALLY
MAKE BLIND SPOTS A THING OF THE
PAST.
>> WE HAVE CURRENTLY ONE
AIRCRAFT UNDER ADSB COVERAGE
THIS MOMENT, A UNITED FLIGHT
FROM CHICAGO GOING TO BEIJING.
>> THE AIRCRAFT DEPICTED IN
WHITE IS USING ADSB TO BROADCAST
IT'S EXACT G.P.S. LOCATION
AUTOMATICALLY ONCE A SECOND.
>> WE SEE THE AIRCRAFT, WE KNOW
IT'S THERE.
WE KNOW EXACTLY WHERE THE
AIRCRAFT IS AT ALL TIMES.
>> Brown: YOU REFER THERE TO
TECHNICAL DETAILS TO BE WORKED
OUT.
I KNOW ANOTHER BARRIER TO
SOMETHING LIKE THAT HAS BEEN
COST.
OW NEAR OR FAR ARE WE FROM A
TECHNOLOGY LIKE THAT TO TRACK
PLANES IN THE FUTURE?
>> WELL WITH, IT'S A -- WELL,
IT'S A PROBLEM.
IT'S TAKEN A LONG TIME.
THE NEXT GENERATION TECHNOLOGY
HAS BEEN SLOW AND CRITICIZED FOR
BEING POORLY FUNDED AND NOT
IMPLEMENTED WELL.
IT NEEDS TO HAPPEN.
I MEAN, JEFF, IT'S THE 21s
21st CENTURY WHERE WE'RE
RELYING ON 1940s TECHNOLOGY TO
TRACK AN AIRPLANE'S RADAR WHICH
HAS A RANGE OF 200 MILES AND
THAT'S IT.
ONLY 2% OF THE SURFACE OF THE
EARTH IS COVERED BY RADAR.
SO WE HAVE SATELLITES THAT CAN
DO THIS, THE TECHNOLOGY IS OFF
THE SHELF, IT'S JUST A MATTER OF
FORCING THE REGULATORS TO MOVE
QUICKLY, FUNDING IT PROPERLY AND
INSISTING THAT THE AIRLINES
EQUIP THEIR AIRPLANES WITH THIS.
AND IT'S DIFFICULT.
THE AIRLINE, THIS IS A TOUGH
BUSINESS AND THE AIRLINES DON'T
WANT THE PUT THIS INVESTMENT
INTO THIS SORT OF TECHNOLOGY
UNLESS THEY HAVE TO, FRANKLY.
>> SO THERE ARE SO MANY PIECES
TO THIS STORY.
I WONDER AS YOU WENT BACK TO
LOOK AT IT ALL, WHAT JUMPED OUT
AT YOU AS MOST INTERESTING OR
SURPNG STILL STICKING
WITH YOU?
>> WELL, IT'S ASTONISHING TO ME,
NUMBER ONE, THAT AN AIRLINER
COULD VANISH IN THIS DAY AND
AGE.
IT'S ASTONISHING.
>> Brown: EVERYBODY FOR SO
LONG, THAT'S NEVER GONE AWAY,
RIGHT?
>> I CAN'T GET OUT OF MY HEAD
THAT AFTER ALL THESE SEVEN
MONTHS, WE HAVEN'T SEEN A SEAT
CUSHION, A FLIGHT MAGAZINE OR A
SHOE THAT HAS BEEN FLOATING IN
THE OCEAN AS SOME EVIDENCE THERE
IS, IN FACT, WRECKAGE OUT THERE.
YOU KNOW, WHEN AIR FRANCE 447
CRASHED INTO THE ATLANTIC OCEAN
IN 2009, THEY ULTIMATELY PICKED
UP 3,000 PIECES OF FLOATING
DEBRIS IN THE OCEAN.
SO WHEN PLANES GO INTO THE
OCEAN, IT'S NOT LIKE THEY JUST
GO IN CLEANLY AND DISAPPEAR THAT
WAY.
THERE WILL BE SOMETHING
FLOATING.
SO WHERE IS IT?
I'M MYSTIFIED AT THAT, AND I
REMAIN -- I WANT THEM THINKING I
WAS GOING TO HAVE AN ANSWER TO
WHERE THIS PLANE IS AND I WALKED
AWAY STILL WONDERING.
>> Brown: DO YOU THINK IT WILL
BE SOLVED EVENTUALLY?
>> I DON'T THINK THEY'LL STOP
LOOKING.
THEY CAN'T.
IT'S A HUGE, HUGE REGION.
WE'RE GOING TO HAVE TO BE VERY
PATIENT.
HERE'S MY WORRY, THOUGH -- WHEN
THEY FIND THE BLACK BOXES, AND
THEY WILL ONE DAY, WHEN THEY
FIND THOSE BLACK BOXES, IT MAY
NOT ANSWER THE MYSTERY.
IF IT SHOWS IT WAS A PERFECTLY
GOOD OPERATING AIRCRAFT THAT RAN
OUT OF FUEL AND YOU HAVE A
COCKPIT VOICE RECORDER THAT IS
SILENT, WHAT HAS THAT TOLD YOU?
YOU DON'T KNOW WHO DID IT OR
WHY.
>> Brown: WHY PLANES VANISHED
ON NO VA, MILES O'BRIEN, THANK
YOU VERY MUCH.
>> YOU'RE WELL COME, JEFF.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT, A
WORLD RENOWNED ARTIST, BARRED
FROM LEAVING HIS HOME COUNTRY OF
CHINA EXPLORES THE IDEA OF
FREEDOM IN A NEW EXHIBIT IN
AMERICA'S MOST NOTORIOUS PRISON.
SAN FRANCISCO PUBLIC MEDIA
KQED'S MINA KIM TAKES US BEHIND
THE SCENES.
>> Reporter: SO MUCH ABOUT
THIS EXHIBIT IS DIFFERENT
BEGINNING WITH HOW YOU GET
THERE, BY FERRY TO AN ISLAND IN
THE MIDDLE OF SAN FRANCISCO BAY.
MOST OF THESE PASSENGERS ARE
GOING TO TOUR THE LEGENDARY
FORMER PRISON, ALCATRAZ.
WITHIN ITS CRUMBLING WALLS,
SEVEN NEW WORKS WERE STUMBLED
UPON BY ARTIST AND CHINESE
DISSIDENT AEI WEIWEI.
WE CAME TO SEE THE PROCESS OF
INSTALLING AN EXHIBIT.
THIS WILL TAKE UP ENTIRE
SPACE?
>> ENTIRE SPACE.
THERE ARE MORE THAN 100 KITES
THAT COMPRISE THE BODY OF THE
DRAGON.
>> Reporter: EXHIBIT CURATOR.
THE ARTIST HAD BEEN RELEASED
FROM DETENTION BY CHINA FOR
ALLEGED TAX EVASION.
AUTHORITIES SAY IT WAS MORE
ABOUT HIS SUPPRESSING CRITICISM
OF THE CHINESE GOVERNMENT.
>> THE EXHIBITION IS WHAT IS
FREEDOM.
AS YOU WALK THROUGH THE WORKS,
YOU GET A SENSE THAT THIS IS A
VERY CENTRAL THEME, A VERY
IMPORTANT IDEA HE IS ADDRESSING.
>> Reporter: HE HAS BEEN
UNABLE TO LEAVE CHINA SINCE 2011
AFTER AUTHORITIES CONFISCATED
HIS PASSPORT.
FINDING FREEDOM WITHIN
CONSTRAINTS IS A WORTHY
CHALLENGE JUDGING BY HIS AGE
STUDIO.
HIS INABILITY TO LEAVE THE
COUNTRY IS HARD.
>> FOR AN ARTIST TO BE UNABLE TO
SEE THEVE AND UNABLE TO
INTERACT WITH THE AUDIENCE, IF I
HAD TO IMAGINE THE TOUGHEST
RESTRICTION OF AN EXHIBITION,
THAT WOULD BE IT.
>> Reporter: HE CONVEYS THE
SITUATION IN A GIANT DRAGON KITE
INSTALLED IN A
PRISONERS ONCE MADE UNIFORMS FOR
THE ARMY.
>> IT WILL BE SUSPENDED, FLYING,
FREE, BUT ALSO RESTRICTED WITHIN
THE BUILDING, SO THIS IS A
REALLY INTERESTING CONVERSATION
BETWEEN CONTROL AND FREEDOM.
>> BUT WHAT DOES IT MEAN TO BE
IN PRISON?
WHAT IS A PRISON?
>> Reporter: SO MUCH ABOUT
THIS EXHIBIT IS DIFFERENT,
BEGINNING WITH HOW YOU GET
THERE.
>> FOR MOST VISITORS TO
ALCATRAZ, THIS IS PROBABLY THE
ONLY PRISON THEY EVER WILL BE
CLOSE TO.
SO WHAT THOUGHTS ARE EVOKED WHEN
THEY COME TO A PRISON?
WE FELT THAT THE AEI WEIWEI
EXHIBITION WOULD BE AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR VISITOR TO
EXPLORE THE THOUGHTS.
>> Reporter: THE PARK SERVICE
HAD TO SEEK CLEARING FROM THE
U.S. STATE DEPARTMENT TO HOST
ONE OF THE MOST VOCAL ITICS OF
CHINA'S GOVERNMENT ON FEDERAL
LAND.
THE CHALLENGES OF BRINGING THE
WORK TO ALCATRAZ ONLY ADDED TO
THE INJURY.
THE ENTIRE ISLAND IS AN
HISTORICAL SITE WITHOUT A POWER
GRID OR FRESHWATER SOURCE.
>> WE BASICALLY CANNOT TOUCH THE
WALLS.
WE CANNOT TOUCH ANYTHING.
WE CANNOT ADD ANYTHING.
IT'S A HANGING INSTALLATION,
LIKE THE PRISONERS THEMSELVES,
IT IS ONLY THERE FOR A PERIOD OF
TIME.
>> Reporter: THIS PIECE WAS
SHIPPED BY BARGE AND PUSHED UP A
13-STORY HILL, TRANSFORMED SOLAR
COLLECTORS FROMTY BET.
SOME OF ALCATRAZS BEST-KNOWN
PRISONERS INCLUDE AL CAPONE OR
THE ANLINE BROTHERS WHO PLOTTED
A DARING ESCAPE.
LAST KNOWN ARE THE POLITICAL
IS THE ISLAND
DURING THE TIME ALCATRAZ WAS A
MILITARY PRISON.
PHELPS OVERSEES VISITOR PROGRAMS
AT ALCATRAZ IN.
>> THE MILITARY PRISON ERA,
ARO19 GROUP
OF INDIAN ELDERS THAT WERE
BROUGHT TO ALCATRAZ BECAUSE THEY
REFUSED TO SEND THEIR CHILDREN
TO SCHOOL UNDER THE ARMY'S
DIRECTION.
THEY WANTED TO RAISE THEIR
CHILDREN IN THE HOPI TRADITION.
>> Reporter: A HOPI CHANT
ECHOES AGAINST THE WALLS OF A
FORMER PSYCHIATRIC OBSERVATION
CELL.
HERE ARE THE POETRY AND MUSIC OF
PEOPLE IN PRISON AROUND THE
WORLD FOR EXPRESSING BELIEFS.
AND PRISON RIOTS WHO CRITICIZED
VLADIMIR PUTIN.
IN A PIECE TITLED "TRACE" THE
FACES OF MORE THAN 175
DISSIDENTS ARE FASHIONED IN
LEGGOS.
LARGELY UNKNOWN.
AEI WEIWEI WANTS TO MAKE THEM
FAMILIAR.
>> AND TO HAVE THE OPPORTUNITY
TO FIND OUT MORE ABOUT THEIR
LIVES AND STORIES HAS BEEN
ENRICHING.
>> Reporter: THE EXHIBIT
INCLUDES POSITION PHIS FOR THE
MEN AND WOMEN HELD IN THE MIDDLE
EAST, AFRICA, ASIA, AND THERE'S
EDWARD SHOWE SNOWDEN WANTED FORK
U.S. CLASSIFIED DOCUMENTS.
SOME CONSIDER HIM A PATRIOT,
OTHERS A TRAITOR.
HERE, VISITORS ARE ASKED TO
WRITE PREADDRESSED POSTCARDS WHO
PEOPLE WHO ARE EXILED AND WHO
ARE DEEMED PRISONERS OF
CONSCIENCE.
CHAD SAYS I WALK THE FINE LINE.
>> THERE'S A HUGE DEBATE ABOUT
WHO AEI WEIWEI IS IN THE SENSE
THE FOLKS IN THE ART WORLD ARE
CONCERNED HE'S TOO MUCH ACTIVIST
AND NOT ENOUGH ARTIST.
THE VEHICLES IN THE ACTIVIST
WORLD THINK THE OPPOSITE.
>> Reporter: HIS ACTIVISM
GIVES HIM A STARDOM FEW OTHERS
ENJOY.
HIS ARTWORK IS IN HIGH DEMAND.
WILL HIS WORK CHANGE?
>> ART DONE WELL HAS THE ABILITY
TO COMMUNICATE VISCERALLY ISSUES
THAT -- OR TO SNAKE ITS WAY INTO
US THROUGH BEAUTY OR THROUGH THE
WAY WE VIEW IT THAT A STRAY
DEMONSTRATION OR POSTER WOULD
NEVER ACHIEVE.
>> Reporter: THE SHOW RUNS
UNTIL THE 26th.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
THE FIRST PATIENT DIAGNOSED WITH
EBOLA INSIDE THE U.S., THOMAS
DUNCAN OF LIBERIA, DIED AT A
DALLAS HOSPITAL.
AND, FEDERAL OFFICIALS ANNOUNCED
NEW EBOLA SCREENING AT MAJOR
INTERNATIONAL AIRPORTS FOR
TRAVELERS ARRIVING FROM WEST
AFRICA.
>> Ifill: ON THE NEWSHOUR ONLINE
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.